# Design Patterns


## What are Design Patterns

- Design Patterns are typical implemented solutions to commonly occouring problems.
- They are akin to blueprints that can be adapted and implemented to suit the needs of the progammer and code.

### Designs

- Patterns are designed to be predictable, repeatable and understandbale.
- They are described formally to in similar ways to ensure that they are easily understook and implemented.
- Design patterns follow the following structure.
  - Intent, what is the issue that the design pattern fixes and what sort of solution does it implement
  - Motivation, impact of issue and solution
  - Structure, classes of the pattern and how they are related
  - Code eample, showing an implementation of the pattern

### Types of Patterns

There are three types of design patterns:

- Creational patterns. Patterns that describe methods to create objects.
- Structural patterns. Patterns that describe how to assemble objects and classes into larger structures.
- Behavioural patters. Patterms that describe the communication and responsibility sharing between objects.

## Design Pattern Use Case

Design patterns are good for a variety of reasons.

* Code maintainability
  * Code that is structured and organised consistently promotes pattern recognition and enhances interpretation.
* DRY
  * Design patterns solve recurring problems. These solutions can be used throughout different parts of the application.
* Simplifying problems
  * Complex software problems can be broken down into smaller, more manageable components using design patterns. This simplifies development by addressing one problem.
* Scalability
  * Design patterns, particularly structural patterns, allow us to create a flexible and extensible architecture, making it easier to add new features or components.
* Testability
  * Design patterns can be modular. This allows easier testing of individual systems or components.
* Cross-platform development
  * Design patterns are language agnostic. They are just guidelines.
* Interaction
  * Design patterns provide a common language and a shared understanding among team members. They enable developers to communicate effectively and collaborate on software projects by referring to well-known design solutions.
