# Behavioural Design Patterns

Behavioural design patterns are concerned with algorithims and the sharing of responsibility between objects.

In many situations, behavioural patterns involve transforming logic processes into standalone objects called handlers.

Common behavioural design patterns include:

- Observer pattern
- Strategy pattern
- State pattern
- Command pattern
- Chain of responsibility
- Template pattern
- Visitor pattern
- Mediator pattern
- Momento pattern

## Observer pattern

The observer pattern defines a subscription mechanism to notify multiple objects about any events that happened to the object they are observing.

The publisher (subject object) notifies the subscribers when the publisher's subscription mechanism has been triggered. This is usually an array field for storing a list of references to subscriber objects and several public methods which allow adding and removing subsribers.

You should consider using an observer pattern when changes to the state of one object may require changing other objects and the actual set of objeccts changes dynamically. This is often useful when working with a GUI, say if you had custom button classes and they wanted to tie in some custom code to fire when pressed. The observer pattern lets any object that implements the subscriber interface subscribe to event notifications from the publisher object. 

### Implementation 

Approximate implementation should look something like this:

1. Split code into core functionality that will act as pubisher and reactive functionality that will be subscribers.
2. Declare the subscriber interface, it should declare an update method.
3. Declare the publisher interface and describe a pair of methods for adding a subscriber object to and removing it from the list.
4. Stick the subscription list and the implementation of the subscription lists somewhere. Usually an abstract class derived directly from the publisher interface. Any concrete publishers should extend this class.
5. Create the concrete publisher classes.
6. Implement the update notification methods. Most subscribers will be passed data context through notification method.

## Strategy pattern

## State pattern

The State behavioural pattern lets an object alter its behaviour when its internal state changes, appearing as if it has changed its class.

This should be used when the is an object that behaves differently depending on its current state, there are a large amount of states and the state code changes frequently. You will know you need to use this pattern if you program has lots of conditionals getting in the way of you app's behaviour.

### Implementation

It is possible to get most of the way to this functionality by using conditional logic, however the best way to do it would be to use the state pattern. Create a new class for all possible states of an object and extract all state specific behaviours into these classes. As opposed to executing the behaviour on its own, the originating object stores its current state and then delegates the action to the state object. 

More thorough overview is as follows:

1. Make the 'context' or stateful object.
2. Declare the state interface, should only contain state specific behaviour.
3. For every actual state, create a class that derives frmo the state interface.
4. Within each context class, add a reference to the state interface type and a public setter method that can overwrite that value.
5. Remove conditionals from context and replace with state calls.
6. To switch states, create an instance of one of the state classes and pass it to the context object.


## Command pattern

A command pattern turns a request into a stand-alone object that contains all of the information about the request. This lets you pass the request as a method argument, handle execution timing and support undoable operations.

This looks like a button starting a "command function" which creates the command object and then sends that object to either the server or the data layer to be parsed.

### Implementation

All of the commands must implement the same interface, usually just a single execution method with no params.

Approximate steps to implement are as follows:

1. Declare a command interface, with a single execution method.
2. Start extracting requests into concrete classes that implement the command interface. Each class much have a set of fields for storing the request arguments and references to the reciever object. These values must be initiated via the command's constructor.
3. Identify which classes will act as senders. Add fields for storing commands into these classes. Senders should only communicate with the commands via the command interface.
4. Change the sender so they execute the command, as oppposed to sending the request directly.
5. Client should init objects in this order: recievers, commands, senders.

## Chain of responsibility

The chain of responsibility pattern is a pattern that lets you pass requests along a chain of handlers. Upon receiving a request, each handler will decide to either process the request of to pass it to the next handler.

This allows you to perform checks and balances in sequence. As an example: Is a user logged in -> Is this user an admin -> ...

This entails transforming individual behaviours into standalone objects called handlers. Each check should be its own class with a singular method that performs the check. The request, along with the data is passed to this method as an argument.

In this pattern, each handler has a field for storing the reference to the next handler. In addition, you can also break from the pattern early and stop any further processing. There are also variants of this approach in which handlers will pass requests along until one of them decides that they can process the request and then it will exit there.

A chain of responsibility pattern should be used when:

1. A program is expected to process different kinds of requests in various ways, but the types of requests and their sequence is unknown.
2. It is essential to execute handlers in a particular order.
3. Checking and setting is required to be dynamic.

### Implementation

In this set up, the handler class must implement the same interface. Each concrete handler should only care about having the one execute method. This way you can compile the handlers at run time and not have them tied to their concrete classes.

Actual implementation should look something like this:

1. Declare the handler interface and describe the signature of the method for handling requests.
   1. You should also decide how the client will pass requests into the method. This is commonly done through converting the request into an object and passing that to the handling method as an argument.
2. It may be worth creating an abstract base class, derived from the handler interface.
   1. This base class should house the "go next" reference. Implementing the base class will cut down on repreated code.
3. Create the concrete handler subclasses and implement their methods. Each handler should decide to process the request and decide to pass the request along.
4. It may be a good idea to build a factory class to build the chain of handlers.
5. Chains should be dynamic. So:
   1. The Client can choose to trigger any handler in the chain, not only the first.
   2. The request may not actually reach the end of the chain
   3. Requests may reach the end of the chain unhandled

## Template pattern

Template is a behavioural pattern that defines the skeleton of an algorithim in a superclass and allows subclasses to override specific steps and not change its structure.

This is done through breaking down the algorithim into a series of steps, codified as methods and then call those methods from a template method. To use the alorithim, a client should provide its own subclasses, implement all abstract steps and override any it doesn't need.

### Implementation

We use this boy by doing something like this:

1. Break the target algo up into its constituent steps.
2. Create the abstract base class and declare the template method, with a set of abstract methods representing the steps. Outline the structure in the template method by executing the corrasponding steps.
3. Many steps will be abstract, but some might need a default implementation.
4. Add hooks between crucial steps if required.
5. Create a new concrete subclass for each variation of the algorithim. It must implement the abstract steps, but can override the optional ones.

## Visitor pattern

A visitor is a behavioural pattern that seperates algorithims from the objects on which they operate. 

When you need to add functionality to an object, stick that code into a seperate class (the visitor) and as opposed to integrating it into the existing code. This can be helpful when you need to perform an operation on all elements of a complex data structure, such as an object tree. Can clean up business logic.

### Implementation

1. Declare the visitor interface with a set of visiting methods, one per concrete element class that exists within the program.
2. Declare the element interface, can include an abstract acceptance method.
3. Implement the acceptance methods in all concrete element classes. These methods must simply redirect the call to a visiting method on to a incoming visitor object.
4. The element classes should only work with visitors via the visitor interface. Visitors however, must be aware of all concrete element classes, referenced as parameter types of the visiting methods.
5. The Client must create visitor objects and pass them into the elements through acceptance methods.

## Mediator pattern

This pattern restricts direct communication between objects and forces them to communicate through a mediator class.

This reduces dependencies between objects and can steamline a logic process. This is done through all components calling a mediator object which should redirect calls to the appropriate components. As a result, the components only depend only on a single mediator class as opposed to all associated components. 	

You should use a mediator pattern when it is hard to change classes because they are tightly coupled to several other classes.

### Implementation

Follow these approximate steps:

1. Identify a group of tightly coupled classes which would benefit from being more independant.
2. Declare the mediator interface and describe the desired communication protocol between each component.
3. Implement a concrete mediator class. Possibly store all references to components here.
4. Components should store a reference to the mediator object. This connection is usually established in the component's contructor, where a mediator is usually passed as an argument.
5. Change the component's code so that they call the mediator's notification method and not methods on other components. Extract the code that involves calling other components into the mediator class.

## Momento pattern

The momento pattern lets you save and restore the state of an object without revealing the details of its implementation. 

The memento pattern delegates creation of state snapshots to the actual owner of that state. This allows the object to make full snapshots of itself because it knows everything about itself.

The pattern suggests that you store the object's state in a special object called a memento. The contents of the momento should not be accessible from any other objects. Anytime you need to access the momento, this should be done through a limited interface which allows the fetching of certain metadata contained within.

### Implementation

It should look something like this:

1. Nominate an originator.
2. Create the momento class. Declare a set of fields that mirror the fields declared inside the originator class.
3. Make the momento class immutable, it should only accept data once via its constructor. No setters.
4. Nest the memento if possible.
5. Add a method for producing mementos to the original class. It should pass its state to the memento via one or multiple arguments of the memento's constructor.
6. Add a method for restoring the originator's state to its class. It should accept the memento object as an argument.
7. The caretaker should know when to request a new memento from the originator, how to use the memento and how to restore it.
8. The link between caretaker and originator may be moved into the mementor class.
