# Additional Patterns

## Repository Pattern

The Repository pattern has two purposes:

1. It is an abstraction of the data layer and
2. it is a way of centralising the handling of the domain objects

Suggested that it might operate without the need for DAOs. Repositories are not closely associated with a DAO, but respositories are. In this instance, a DAO is not a DTO like object, but rather a list or collection of DTO like objects.

Example being: 

```
public interface ArticleDao {

    List<Article> readAll();

    List<Article> readLatest();

    List<Article> readByTags(Tag... tags);

    Article readById(long id);

    Article create(Article article);

    Article update(Article article);

    Article delete(Article article);

}
```

A simpler way of managing DAO classes is to make them smaller and simple. Also preferable to make the DAO look as similar as possible to their methods. In this instance, thus matching a DAO to a repository is pretty much the same thing as creating an interface.

### Abstraction

The idea of a repository pattern is to have a generic and abstract way for the application to interface with the data layer whilst being agnostic about the nature of the data source itself. 

An example abstraction of a CRUD repository might look something like this:

```
public interface Repository<T> {  
    List<T> readAll();

    T read(Criteria criteria);

    T create(T entity);

    T update(T entity);

    T delete(T entity);
}
```

In the above, we have a particularly abstract implementation, without even a criteria. In this instance, the component using this repository will need to chose what criteria to use. Thus allowing the even further loosening of the connection of the domain layer and the data layer. 

It is more common to use T ReadByIT(K id) or similar, as implementing a truely generic repository could be a bit annoying.

#### Implementation

To go from the above very generic repository, to something more specific, it is usually best to implement an interface which extends the repository. Something like this would work:

```
public interface ArticleRepository extends Repository<Article, Long> {
    List<Article> read();
    Article readById(Long id);
    Article create(Article article);
    Article update(Article article);
    Article delete(Article article);
    List<Article> readLatest();
    List<Article> readByTags(Tag...tags);
}
```

This offers a nice repository for a developer to use since they have a very clear interface with which to use to get information.
